Docs: add "How To - Grouping nodes" section (#4113)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/data.rst

To make the instances of the subclass storable and loadable, it has to be registered through an entry point in the ``aiida.groups`` entry point category.
For example, assuming we have a subclass ``SubClassGroup`` in the module ``aiida_plugin.groups.sub_class:SubClassGroup``, to register it, one has to add the following to the ``setup.py`` of the plugin package::

    "entry_points": {
        "aiida.groups": [
            "plugin.sub_class = aiida_plugin.groups.sub_class:SubClassGroup"
        ]
    }

Now that the subclass is properly registered, instances can be stored::

    group = SubClassGroup(label='sub-class-group')
    group.store()

The ``type_string`` of the group instance corresponds to the entry point name and so in this example is ``plugin.sub_class``.
This is what AiiDA uses to load the correct class when reloading the group from the database::

    group = load_group(group.pk)
    assert isinstance(group, SubClassGroup)

If the entry point is not currently registered, because the corresponding plugin package is not installed for example, AiiDA will issue a warning and fallback onto the ``Group`` base class.

> 

Reviewer: This is part of another issue and I will take care of this. Please remove it here.

Author: removed

.. important::
    Any deletion operation related to groups won't affect the nodes themselves.
    For example if you delete a group, the nodes that belonged to the group will remain in the database.
    The same happens if you remove nodes from the group -- they will remain in the database but won't belong to the group anymore.

Copy one group into another
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This operation will copy the nodes of the source group into the destination group.
If the destination group does not yet exist, it will be created automatically.

From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group copy source_group dest_group
    Success: Nodes copied from group<source_group> to group<dest_group>

From the Python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: src_group = Group.objects.get(label='source_group')

    In [2]: dest_group = Group(label='destination_group').store()

    In [3]: dest_group.add_nodes(list(src_group.nodes))

Examples for using groups
-------------------------

In this section, we will provide some practical examples of how one can use Groups to structure and organize the nodes in the database.

> Example I: grouping structures with a similar property
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Group structures with a similar property
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Reviewer 2: I actually think it might be better to not explicitly enumerate the examples.

> To put the structures for which the computed bandgap is higher than ``1.0 eV`` in the group ``promising_structures`` one should:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose, we wanted to group all structures for which the computed bandgap is higher than ``1.0 eV`` in a group named ``promising_structures``, one could use the following approach:
```

.. code-block:: python

    # Finding the structures with the bandgap > 1.0.
    qb = QueryBuilder()
    qb.append(StructureData,  tag='structure', project='*') # Here we are projecting the entire structure object
    qb.append(CalcJobNode, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.bandgap': {'>': 1.0}})

    # Adding the structures in 'promising_structures' group
    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')
    group.add_nodes(q.all(flat=True))

.. note::

    Any node can be included in a group only once and if it is added again, it is simply ignored.
    This means that add_nodes can be safely called multiple times, and only nodes that weren't already part of the group, will be added.

> Example II: work with data in the groups
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use grouped data for further processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Here is a prototype script that would allow us to submit calculations for the structures belonging to the ``promising_structures`` group.

Reviewer 2: Here we demonstrate how to submit calculations for structures that all belong to a group named ``promising_structures``:

.. code-block:: python

    # Querying the structures that belong to the 'promising_structures' group.
    qb = QueryBuilder()
    qb.append(Group, filters={'label': 'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
    qb.append(StructureData, with_group='group')

    # Submitting the simulations.
    for structure in qb.all(flat=True):
        builder = SomeWorkChain.get_builder()
        builder.structure = structure
        ...
        submit(builder)

Note, however, that one can also use ``group.nodes`` to access the nodes of the group.

> To achieve the same result as above one would need to do something as follows:

Reviewer 2: Which approach is better? We don't have to show both.

Author: I think the first approach is faster (one loop vs two), while the second approach is cleaner. This is why I put both them here. I don't have clear preferences.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, ok. Let's keep both then.

.. code-block:: python

    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')

    # Here make sure to include only structures, as group can contain any nodes.
    structures = [s for s in group.nodes if isinstance(nodes, StructureData)]
    for structure in structures:
        builder = SomeWorkChain.get_builder()
        builder.structure = structure
        ...
        submit(builder)

> To find the structures that has a property ``property_a`` lower than ``1`` and at the same time belongs to the ``promising_structures`` group, one would need to build a query that looks as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To find all structures that have a property ``property_a`` with a value lower than ``1`` and also belong to the ``promising_structures`` group, one could build a query as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python

    qb = QueryBuilder()
    qb.append(Group, filters={'label': 'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
    qb.append(StructureData, with_group='group', tag='structure', project='*')
    qb.append(SomeWorkChain, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.property_a': {'<': 1}})

> As a result, ``qb.all(flat=True)`` would contain all the structures matching the criteria.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The return value of ``qb.all(flat=True)`` would contain all the structures matching the above mentioned criteria.
```

> Case III: use groups for data exporting
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using groups for data exporting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^```

> Groups can be very handy for selecting the parts of the database for sharing.
> To share the simulations you've done for the structures in the ``promising_structures`` group do the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Groups can be very useful for selecting specific parts of the database for sharing.
All data related to calculations that involved structures as part of the ``promising_structures`` group can be exported with a single command:
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi export create export.aiida -G promising_structures

> Such an export operation would not only export the structures that are part of the group, but also the nodes linked to them, following the rules  discussed in the :ref:`topics:provenance:consistency:traversal-rules` section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such an export operation would not only export the structures that are part of the group, but also the nodes linked to them, following the rules discussed in the :ref:`topics:provenance:consistency:traversal-rules` section.
```

How to group nodes
------------------

AiiDA's database is great for automatically storing all your data, but sometimes it can be tricky to navigate this flat data store.
To create some order in this mass of data, you can *group* sets of nodes together, just as you would with files in folders on your filesystem.
A folder, in this analogy, is represented by the :py:class:`~aiida.orm.groups.group.Group` class.
Each Group instance can hold any amount of nodes and any node can be contained in any number of nodes.
A typical use case is to store all nodes that share a common property in a single group.

Below we show how to perform a typical set of operations one may want to perform with groups.

Create a new group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group create test_group

From the Python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = Group(label='test_group')

    In [2]: group.store()
    Out[2]: <Group: "test_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>

List available groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Example:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group list

Groups come in different types, indicated by their type string.

> 

Reviewer: remove these empty lines

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group remove-nodes -c -G test_group
    Do you really want to remove ALL the nodes from Group<test_group>? [y/N]:

In the Python interface you can use ``.clear()`` method to achieve the same goal:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = load_group(label='test_group')

    In [2]: group.clear()

Rename a group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

      $ verdi group relabel test_group old_group
      Success: Label changed to old_group

From the Python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = load_group(label='old_group')

    In [2]: group.label = 'another_group'

Delete a group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

      $ verdi group delete another_group
      Are you sure to delete Group<another_group>? [y/N]: y
      Success: Group<another_group> deleted.

.. important::
    Any deletion operation related to groups won't affect the nodes themselves.
    For example if you delete a group, the nodes that belonged to the group will remain in the database.

>     The same happens if you delete nodes from the group -- they will remain in the database but won't belong to the group anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The same happens if you remove nodes from the group -- they will remain in the database but won't belong to the group anymore.
```

In this section, we will provide some practical examples of how one can use Groups to structure and organize the nodes in the database.

Example I: grouping structures with a similar property
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Suppose you have a database of structures for which you have performed a set of simulations.
Your goal is to continue the study only for the structures for which the bandgap is higher than ``1.0 eV``
To achieve that goal you would first need to make a query that finds such structures and puts them into a group.
Let's go through the whole process step by step.

1. We start with creating the group ``promising_structures`` in the ``bash`` shell:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group create promising_structures
    Success: Group created with PK = 8 and name 'promising_structures'

2. Then we do a query that finds the structures which have the property ``bandgap`` higher than  ``1.0``.

.. code-block:: python

    qb = QueryBuilder()
    qb.append(StructureData,  tag='structure', project='*') # Here we are projecting the entire structure object
    qb.append(CalcJobNode, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')

>     qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.bandgap':{'>':1.0}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.bandgap': {'>': 1.0}})
```

3. Finally, we put all the structures into the ``promising_structures`` group.

.. code-block:: python

    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')
    group.add_nodes(q.all(flat=True))

.. note::

    It is completely fine to add nodes to the group even if they were already there.

>     Hence the steps 2. and 3. can be repeated as is.

Reviewer: Any node can be included in a group only once and if it is added again, it is simply ignored.
This means that `add_nodes` can be safely called multiple times, and only nodes that weren't already part of the group, will be added.

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group show promising_structures
    -----------------  --------------------
    Group label        promising_structures
    Group type_string  core
    Group description  <no description>
    -----------------  --------------------
    # Nodes:
        PK  Type           Created
    ------  -------------  ----------------
     37757  StructureData  229D:02h:02m ago
     25082  StructureData  229D:02h:51m ago
     41209  StructureData  229D:02h:51m ago
    119793  StructureData  124D:00h:46m ago
     # ...

The structures that were added to the group can now be used further for running calculations with them or for exporting them together, as shown in the examples below.

Example II: work with data in the groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The data that are organized in the groups can now be accessed separately.
Let's make a prototype script that would allow us to submit calculations for the structures belonging to the ``promising_structures`` group.
For that we need to make a query:

.. code-block:: python

    qb = QueryBuilder()

>     qb.append(Group, filters={'label':'promising_structures'}, tag='group')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    qb.append(Group, filters={'label': 'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
```

    qb.append(StructureData, with_group='group')

The results of this query can be used, for instance, for subsequent simulations:

.. code-block:: python

>     for structure in q.all(flat=True):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    for structure in qb.all(flat=True):
```

        builder = SomeWorkChain.get_builder()
        builder.structure = structure
        ...
        submit(builder)

Note, however, that one can also use ``group.nodes`` to access the nodes of the group.
To achieve the same result as above one would need to do something as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')
    # Here make sure to include only structures, as group can contain any nodes.
    structures = [s for s in group.nodes if isinstance(nodes, StructureData)]
    for structure in structures:
        builder = SomeWorkChain.get_builder()
        builder.structure = structure
        ...
        submit(builder)

For the postprocessing of the results, one can also make use of the groups.
To find the structure that has a property ``property_a`` lower than ``1`` and at the same time belongs to the ``promising_structures`` group, one would need to build a query that looks as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    qb = QueryBuilder()

>     qb.append(Group, filters={'label':'promising_structures'}, tag='group')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    qb.append(Group, filters={'label': 'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
```

    qb.append(StructureData, with_group='group', tag='structure', project='*')
    qb.append(SomeWorkChain, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')

>     qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.property_a':{'<':1}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.property_a': {'<': 1}})
```

Organizing data
===============

> Groups

Author: done

------
Group is a tool to organize the nodes of the provenance graph into sub sets.
Any number of groups can be created and each group can contain any number of nodes of any type.

Typically, you want to put multiple nodes into a group because they share some common property, and through the group they can easily be referenced.
Unlike nodes, groups can be modified at any time.

> Here we profide a list of typical operations that may be performed with groups:

Reviewer: I would start here with a quick description of the problem that this section is aiming to address. I imagine this makes it easier for the user to recognize whether they are in the right section, for what they are looking for. Something like:

> AiiDA's database is great for automatically storing all your data, but sometimes it can be tricky to navigate this flat data store.
> To create some order in this mass of data, you can *group* sets of nodes together, just as you would with files in folders on your filesystem.
> A folder, in this analogy, is represented by the :py:class:`~aiida.orm.groups.group.Group` class.
> Each ``Group`` instance can hold any amount of nodes and any node can be contained in any number of nodes.
> A typical use case is to store all nodes that share a common property in a single group.

Before you actually start to add these changes, @csadorf do you agree with this direction/wording?

Reviewer 2: I think it's worthwhile to try to motivate this section by briefly illustrating the underlying problem. 👍

Author: changed

.. note::
    Any deletion operation related to groups won't affect the nodes themselves.
    For example if you delete a group, the nodes that belonged to the group will remain in the database.

>     The same happens if you delete nodes from the group -- they will remain in the database but won't belong to the group anymore.

Reviewer: This should be moved to the section on deleting groups

Author: moved.

Create a new Group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group create test_group

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: group = Group(label="test_group")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In [1]: group = Group(label='test_group')
```

Author: done

    In [2]: group.store()
    Out[2]: <Group: "test_group" [type user], of user xxx@xx.com>

List available Groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Example:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group list

> 

Reviewer: Add the line:
> Groups come in different types, indicated by their type string.

Author: done

> By default ``verdi group list`` only shows groups of the type *user*.

Reviewer: This is outdated
```suggestion
By default ``verdi group list`` only shows groups of the type *core*.
```

Author: done

> In case you want to show groups of another type use ``-t/--type`` option.

Reviewer: That option has been deprecated
```suggestion
In case you want to show groups of another type use ``-T/--type-string`` option.
```

Author: done

If you want to show groups of all types, use the ``-a/--all-types`` option.

> From the command line interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To filter for a specific group type, use the ``-T/--type-string`` flag:
```

Author: done

.. code-block:: console

>     $ verdi group list -t user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ verdi group list -T core.auto
```

Author: done

> From the python interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the ``QueryBuilder``, use the ``filters`` keyword to filter for a particular ``type_string``:
```

Author: done

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: query = QueryBuilder()
> 
>     In [2]: query.append(Group, filters={'type_string':'user'})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In [1]: builder = QueryBuilder().append(Group, filters={'type_string': 'core'})
```

Author: done

    Out[2]: <aiida.orm.querybuilder.QueryBuilder at 0x7f20db413ef0>

>     In [3]: query.all()

Author: done

    Out[3]:

>     [[<Group: "another_group" [type user], of user xxx@xx.com>],
>     [<Group: "old_group" [type user], of user xxx@xx.com>],
>     [<Group: "new_group" [type user], of user xxx@xx.com>]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [
     <Group: "another_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>],
     <Group: "old_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>],
     <Group: "new_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>]
    ]
```

Add nodes to a Group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Once the ``test_group`` has been created, we can add nodes to it.
To add the node with ``pk=1`` to the group we need to do the following.

From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group add-nodes -G test_group 1
    Do you really want to add 1 nodes to Group<test_group>? [y/N]: y

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: group = Group.get(label='test_group')

Author: done

    In [2]: from aiida.orm import Dict

    In [3]: p = Dict().store()

    In [4]: p
    Out[4]: <Dict: uuid: 09b3d52a-d0c4-4e3c-823c-6157f84af920 (pk: 2)>

    In [5]: group.add_nodes(p)

Show information about a Group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group show test_group

    -----------------  ----------------
    Group label        test_group
    Group type_string  user
    Group description  <no description>
    -----------------  ----------------
    # Nodes:
    PK    Type    Created
    ----  ------  ---------------
     1    Code    26D:21h:45m ago

Remove nodes from a Group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group remove-nodes -G test_group 1
    Do you really want to remove 1 nodes from Group<test_group>? [y/N]: y

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: group = Group.get(label='test_group')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In [1]: group = load_group(label='test_group')
```

    In [2]: group.clear()

Rename Group
^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

      $ verdi group relabel test_group old_group
      Success: Label changed to old_group

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = Group.get(label='old_group')

>     In [2]: group.label = "another_group"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In [2]: group.label = 'another_group'
```

Delete Group
^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

      $ verdi group delete another_group
      Are you sure to delete Group<another_group>? [y/N]: y
      Success: Group<another_group> deleted.

Copy one group into another
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This operation will copy the nodes of the source group into the destination group.

> Moreover, if the destination group did not exist before, it will be created automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the destination group does not yet exist, it will be created automatically.
```

From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    verdi group copy source_group dest_group
    Success: Nodes copied from group<source_group> to group<dest_group>

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: src_group = Group.objects.get(label='source_group')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In [1]: src_group = load_group(label='source_group')
```

    In [2]: dest_group = Group(label='destination_group').store()

    In [3]: dest_group.add_nodes(list(src_group.nodes))

Organizing data with groups
---------------------------

> In this section, we will study some practical examples of how one can use Groups to improve the management of the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will provide some practical examples of how one can use Groups to structure and organize the nodes in the database.
```

> Case I: groupping structures with a similar property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Case I: grouping structures with a similar property
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Suppose you have a database of structures for which you have performed a set of simulations.
Your goal is to continue the study only for the structures for which the bandgap is higher than ``0.08 a.u.``
To achieve that goal you would first need to make a query that finds such structures and puts them into a group.
Let's go through the whole process step by step.

1. We start with creating the group ``promising_structures`` in the ``bash`` shell:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group create promising_structures
    Success: Group created with PK = 8 and name 'promising_structures'

2. Then we do a query that finds the structures which have the property ``bandgap_spin1_au`` higher than  ``0.08``.

.. code-block:: python

    q = QueryBuilder()
    q.append(StructureData,  tag='structure', project='*') # Here we are projecting the entire structure object

>     q.append(Cp2kCalculation, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')

Reviewer: Can we replace the very specific `Cp2kCalculation` and `bandgap_spin1_au` everywhere for the more generic `CalcJobNode` and `bandgap`, respectively?

>     q = QueryBuilder()
>     q.append(StructureData,  tag='structure', project='*') # Here we are projecting the entire structure object
>     q.append(Cp2kCalculation, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
>     q.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.bandgap_spin1_au':{'>':0.08}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    builder = QueryBuilder()
    builder.append(StructureData,  tag='structure', project='*') # Here we are projecting the entire structure object
    builder.append(Cp2kCalculation, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
    builder.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.bandgap_spin1_au': {'>': 0.08}})
```

3. Finally, we put all the structures into the ``promising_structures`` group.

.. code-block:: python

>     group = Group.get(label='promising_structures')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')
```

     36721  StructureData  229D:07h:03m ago
     12639  StructureData  229D:00h:18m ago
    129749  StructureData  120D:12h:33m ago
    105044  StructureData  120D:13h:50m ago
     55375  StructureData  229D:06h:54m ago
    103625  StructureData  123D:23h:44m ago
      1830  StructureData  229D:04h:47m ago
    113308  StructureData  124D:03h:52m ago
    101526  StructureData  112D:10h:14m ago
    100501  StructureData  229D:06h:54m ago
     63252  StructureData  229D:00h:17m ago
    112654  StructureData  120D:11h:40m ago
    115210  StructureData  112D:07h:51m ago
     70409  StructureData  227D:19h:48m ago
    103943  StructureData  112D:09h:10m ago
    104579  StructureData  112D:10h:15m ago
     73731  StructureData  228D:04h:22m ago

The structures that were added to the group can now be used further.

Case II: work with data in the groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The data that are organized in the groups can now be accessed separately.
Let's make a prototype script that would allow us to submit calculations for the structures belonging to the ``promising_structures`` group.
For that we need to make a query:

.. code-block:: python

>     q = QueryBuilder()
>     q.append(Group, filters={'label':'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
>     q.append(StructureData, with_group='group')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    builder = QueryBuilder()
    builder.append(Group, filters={'label': 'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
    builder.append(StructureData, with_group='group')
```

The results of this query can be used, for instance, for subsequent simulations:

.. code-block:: python

>     for structure in q.all(flat=True):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    for structure in builder.all(flat=True):
```

        builder = SomeWorkChain.get_builder()
        builder.structure = structure
        ...
        submit(builder)

Note, however, that one can also use ``group.nodes`` to access the nodes of the group.
To achieve the same result ab above one would need to do something as follows:

.. code-block:: python

>     group = Group.get(label='promising_structures')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')
```

    # Here make sure to include only structures, as group can contain any nodes.
    structures = [s for s in group.nodes if isinstance(nodes, StructureData)]
    for structure in structures:
        builder = SomeWorkChain.get_builder()
        builder.structure = structure
        ...
        submit(builder)

For the postprocessing of the results, one can also make use of the groups.
To find the structure that has a property ``property_a`` lower than ``1`` and at the same time belongs to the ``promising_structures`` group, one would need to build a query that looks as follows:

.. code-block:: python

>     q = QueryBuilder()
>     q.append(Group, filters={'label':'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
>     q.append(StructureData, with_group='group', tag='structure', project='*')
>     q.append(SomeWorkChain, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
>     q.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.property_a':{'<':1}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    builder = QueryBuilder()
    builder.append(Group, filters={'label': 'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
    builder.append(StructureData, with_group='group', tag='structure', project='*')
    builder.append(SomeWorkChain, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
    builder.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.property_a': {'<': 1}})
```

Reviewer 2: Do we have some convention for this? I'd imagine that the `QueryBuilder` class is used quite often and maybe calling it `qb` every time is actually clearer than `builder` considering that there are other `builder` instances in the aiida-core namespace?

Reviewer: There is no explicit convention for the docs yet, but in the code base, I have been steadily converting all usage to `builder` for consistency, especially in the ORM itself. There is still quite a bit of code that uses all other sort of variables, e.g., `qb`, `qbl`, `qb_object`, `q` and lots of others.

Reviewer 2: I think we should have a brief discussion about this with the team, because I am not convinced that `builder` is the optimal choice here. There are certain cases where using very short, but consistent variable names is preferable, e.g., `np` for `numpy` or `pd` for `pandas` comes to mind.

Reviewer: Fair enough. The most important part for me is intelligibility and consistency

Reviewer: @yakutovicha let's use `qb` for now, which is also what Marnik is using in other PRs. So at least the documentation for now is consistent

Author: heh, I just replaced everything with `builder`

Author: replaced `builder` with `qb` in 6d498b7

As a result, ``q.all(flat=True)`` would contain all the structures matching the criteria.

Case III: use groups for data exporting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Groups can be very handy for selecting the parts of the database for sharing.
Suppose, you want to share all the simulations you've done for the structures in the ``promising_structures`` group.

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi export create export.aiida -G promising_structures
    STARTING EXPORT...
    RETRIEVING NODES FROM GROUPS...
    RETRIEVING LINKED NODES AND STORING LINKS...
    STORING DATABASE ENTRIES...
    Exporting a total of 1461 db entries, of which 988 nodes.
    STORING NODE ATTRIBUTES AND EXTRAS...
    STORING GROUP ELEMENTS...
    STORING DATA...
    STORING REPOSITORY FILES...
    File written in       22.5 s.
    Success: wrote the export archive file to export.aiida

> Keep in mind that such an export operation would not only export the structures that are belonging to the group, but also the nodes linked to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that such an export operation would not only export the structures that are part of the group, but also the nodes linked to them.
```

Reviewer: Also add a reference to this section here: https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/docs-revamp/topics/provenance/consistency.html#traversal-rules

Organizing data
===============

> Grouping sets of nodes together
> -------------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How to group nodes
------------------
```

AiiDA's database is great for automatically storing all your data, but sometimes it can be tricky to navigate this flat data store.
To create some order in this mass of data, you can *group* sets of nodes together, just as you would with files in folders on your filesystem.

> A folder, in this analogy, is represented by the :py:class:`aiida.orm.groups.group.Group` class.

Reviewer 2: The reference appears to be broken, also I'd suggest to shorten the class names etc:
```suggestion
A folder, in this analogy, is represented by the :py:class:`~aiida.orm.groups.group.Group` class.
```

Each Group instance can hold any amount of nodes and any node can be contained in any number of nodes.
A typical use case is to store all nodes that share a common property in a single group.

> Below we profide a list of typical operations that may be performed with groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below we show how to perform a typical set of operations one may want to perform with groups.
```

> Create a new Group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a new group
```
"Group" is neither a code element nor a name here, but instead refers to the concept "group" so should not be capitalized.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group create test_group

> From the python interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the Python interface:
```
["Python" should be capitalized if used as a name.](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/wiki/Writing-documentation#naming-conventions) Please fix also other occurrences.

Author: I see a lot of `python` in the other parts of the file, should I change them as well?

Reviewer 2: Yes, please.

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = Group(label='test_group')

    In [2]: group.store()
    Out[2]: <Group: "test_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>

> List available Groups

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List available groups
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Example:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group list

Groups come in different types, indicated by their type string.

By default ``verdi group list`` only shows groups of the type *core*.
In case you want to show groups of another type use ``-T/--type-string`` option.
If you want to show groups of all types, use the ``-a/--all-types`` option.

> To filter for a specific group type, use the ``-T/--type-string`` flag:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to list groups of type ``core.auto``, use:
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group list -T core.auto

> When using the ``QueryBuilder``, use the ``filters`` keyword to filter for a particular ``type_string``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, we can use the ``type_string`` key to filter groups with the ``QueryBuilder``:
```

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: qb = QueryBuilder().append(Group, filters={'type_string': 'core'})
>     Out[1]: <aiida.orm.querybuilder.QueryBuilder at 0x7f20db413ef0>
> 
>     In [2]: qb.all(flat=True)
>     Out[2]:
>     [<Group: "another_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>,
>     <Group: "old_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>,
>     <Group: "new_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In [1]: QueryBuilder().append(Group, filters={'type_string': 'core'}).all(flat=True)
    Out[1]:
    [<Group: "another_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>,
    <Group: "old_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>,
    <Group: "new_group" [type core], of user xxx@xx.com>]
```

> Add nodes to a Group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add nodes to a group
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Once the ``test_group`` has been created, we can add nodes to it.

> To add the node with ``pk=1`` to the group we need to do the following.
> 
> From the command line interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to add a node with ``pk=1`` to the group we could either use the command line interface:
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group add-nodes -G test_group 1
    Do you really want to add 1 nodes to Group<test_group>? [y/N]: y

> From the python interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or the Python interface:
```

.. code-block:: ipython

>     In [1]: group = load_group(label='test_group')
> 
>     In [2]: from aiida.orm import Dict
> 
>     In [3]: p = Dict().store()
> 
>     In [4]: p
>     Out[4]: <Dict: uuid: 09b3d52a-d0c4-4e3c-823c-6157f84af920 (pk: 2)>
> 
>     In [5]: group.add_nodes(p)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In [1]: group.add_nodes(load_node(pk=1))
```
This is not a tutorial. We only have to show the absolute minimum needed to convey how this works.

> Show information about a Group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Show information about a group
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group show test_group

    -----------------  ----------------
    Group label        test_group
    Group type_string  user
    Group description  <no description>
    -----------------  ----------------
    # Nodes:
    PK    Type    Created
    ----  ------  ---------------
     1    Code    26D:21h:45m ago

> Remove nodes from a Group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remove nodes from a group
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group remove-nodes -G test_group 1
    Do you really want to remove 1 nodes from Group<test_group>? [y/N]: y

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = load_group(label='test_group')

    In [2]: group.remove_nodes([load_node(1)])

Alternatively, you might want to remove *all* nodes from the group.
In the command line you just need to add ``-c/--clear`` option to ``verdi group remove-nodes ..``

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group remove-nodes -c -G test_group
    Do you really want to remove ALL the nodes from Group<test_group>? [y/N]:

> In the python interface you can use ``.clean()`` method to achieve the same goal:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the python interface you can use ``.clear()`` method to achieve the same goal:
```

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = load_group(label='test_group')

    In [2]: group.clear()

> Rename Group
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rename a group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

      $ verdi group relabel test_group old_group
      Success: Label changed to old_group

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: group = load_group(label='old_group')

    In [2]: group.label = 'another_group'

> Delete Group
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Delete a group
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

From the command line interface:

> .. code-block:: ipython

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: console
```

      $ verdi group delete another_group
      Are you sure to delete Group<another_group>? [y/N]: y
      Success: Group<another_group> deleted.

> .. note::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. important::
```

    Any deletion operation related to groups won't affect the nodes themselves.
    For example if you delete a group, the nodes that belonged to the group will remain in the database.
    The same happens if you delete nodes from the group -- they will remain in the database but won't belong to the group anymore.

Copy one group into another
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This operation will copy the nodes of the source group into the destination group.
If the destination group does not yet exist, it will be created automatically.

From the command line interface:

.. code-block:: console

>     verdi group copy source_group dest_group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    $ verdi group copy source_group dest_group
```

    Success: Nodes copied from group<source_group> to group<dest_group>

From the python interface:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [1]: src_group = Group.objects.get(label='source_group')

    In [2]: dest_group = Group(label='destination_group').store()

    In [3]: dest_group.add_nodes(list(src_group.nodes))

> Organizing data with groups
> ---------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples for using groups
-------------------------
```

Reviewer 2: So, I think the examples in this section are useful, but they read too much like a tutorial and I'm a bit concerned that the section is overall too long already. I think we can keep them *if* we can convert them into proper How-to guides by making them overall more concise, ensuring that each sub-section shows a solution to a specific problem, and transforming the language such that the user does not get the impression that they are expected to follow along *step-by-step*.

In this section, we will provide some practical examples of how one can use Groups to structure and organize the nodes in the database.

> Case I: grouping structures with a similar property
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example I: grouping structures with a similar property
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Suppose you have a database of structures for which you have performed a set of simulations.
Your goal is to continue the study only for the structures for which the bandgap is higher than ``1.0 eV``
To achieve that goal you would first need to make a query that finds such structures and puts them into a group.

> Let's go through the whole process step by step.

Reviewer 2: Again, this should not be a tutorial. Users are not expected to follow along.

Author: We can then move this section somewhere else. Is there a better place for it to be?

Reviewer 2: Do you mean all of the showcase examples?

Author: yes, everything below ` Examples for using groups `

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure there is since we agreed that there would be only one tutorial for now. Is my other suggestion – to convert this into a how-to – not acceptable?

1. We start with creating the group ``promising_structures`` in the ``bash`` shell:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group create promising_structures
    Success: Group created with PK = 8 and name 'promising_structures'

2. Then we do a query that finds the structures which have the property ``bandgap`` higher than  ``1.0``.

.. code-block:: python

    qb = QueryBuilder()
    qb.append(StructureData,  tag='structure', project='*') # Here we are projecting the entire structure object
    qb.append(CalcJobNode, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.bandgap':{'>':1.0}})

3. Finally, we put all the structures into the ``promising_structures`` group.

.. code-block:: python

    group = load_group(label='promising_structures')
    group.add_nodes(q.all(flat=True))

.. note::

    It is completely fine to add nodes to the group even if they were already there.
    Hence the steps 2. and 3. can be repeated as is.

> To check that the structures were actually added to the group, we can return to the ``bash`` shell and show the group content:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To check that the structures were actually added to the group, we can return to the terminal and show the group content:
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi group show promising_structures
    -----------------  --------------------
    Group label        promising_structures
    Group type_string  core
    Group description  <no description>
    -----------------  --------------------
    # Nodes:
        PK  Type           Created
    ------  -------------  ----------------
     37757  StructureData  229D:02h:02m ago
     25082  StructureData  229D:02h:51m ago
     41209  StructureData  229D:02h:51m ago
    119793  StructureData  124D:00h:46m ago

>      36721  StructureData  229D:07h:03m ago
>      12639  StructureData  229D:00h:18m ago
>     129749  StructureData  120D:12h:33m ago
>     105044  StructureData  120D:13h:50m ago
>      55375  StructureData  229D:06h:54m ago
>     103625  StructureData  123D:23h:44m ago
>       1830  StructureData  229D:04h:47m ago
>     113308  StructureData  124D:03h:52m ago
>     101526  StructureData  112D:10h:14m ago
>     100501  StructureData  229D:06h:54m ago
>      63252  StructureData  229D:00h:17m ago
>     112654  StructureData  120D:11h:40m ago
>     115210  StructureData  112D:07h:51m ago
>      70409  StructureData  227D:19h:48m ago
>     103943  StructureData  112D:09h:10m ago
>     104579  StructureData  112D:10h:15m ago
>      73731  StructureData  228D:04h:22m ago

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     # ...
```

> The structures that were added to the group can now be used further.

Reviewer 2: I think this is self-evident. So maybe we can provide an example of *how* they could be used further?

> Case II: work with data in the groups
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example II: work with data in the groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

    qb.append(Group, filters={'label':'promising_structures'}, tag='group')
    qb.append(StructureData, with_group='group', tag='structure', project='*')
    qb.append(SomeWorkChain, with_incoming='structure', tag='calculation')
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='calculation', filters={'attributes.property_a':{'<':1}})

As a result, ``qb.all(flat=True)`` would contain all the structures matching the criteria.

Case III: use groups for data exporting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Groups can be very handy for selecting the parts of the database for sharing.
Suppose, you want to share all the simulations you've done for the structures in the ``promising_structures`` group.

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi export create export.aiida -G promising_structures
    STARTING EXPORT...
    RETRIEVING NODES FROM GROUPS...
    RETRIEVING LINKED NODES AND STORING LINKS...
    STORING DATABASE ENTRIES...
    Exporting a total of 1461 db entries, of which 988 nodes.
    STORING NODE ATTRIBUTES AND EXTRAS...
    STORING GROUP ELEMENTS...
    STORING DATA...
    STORING REPOSITORY FILES...
    File written in       22.5 s.
    Success: wrote the export archive file to export.aiida

> Keep in mind that such an export operation would not only export the structures that are part of the group, but also the nodes linked to them, following the rules  discussed in the :ref:`topics:provenance:consistency:traversal-rules` section.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's appropriate to address the reader like this, but I think it's very easy to make the language a bit less imposing:
```suggestion
Such an export operation would not only export the structures that are part of the group, but also the nodes linked to them, following the rules  discussed in the :ref:`topics:provenance:consistency:traversal-rules` section.
```

.. _how-to:data:organize:

Organizing data

> ===============

Reviewer 2: @yakutovicha I think you accidentally deleted the section header here. Can you restore that?

Author: yes, sorry. Put it back.
